Interim Clinical Guidance for Management of Patients with Confirmed 2019 Novel Coronavirus (2019-nCoV) Infection
Minus
Related Pages
On This Page
Clinical PresentationClinical CourseDiagnostic TestingLaboratory and Radiographic FindingsClinical Management and Treatment
Updated January 30, 2020
This interim guidance is for clinicians caring for patients with confirmed 2019 novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV) infection. CDC will update this interim guidance as more information becomes available.
Clinical Presentation
There are a limited number of reports that describe the clinical presentation of patients with confirmed 2019-nCoV infection, and most are limited to hospitalized patients with pneumonia. The incubation period is estimated at ~5 days (95% confidence interval, 4 to 7 days). Frequently reported signs and symptoms include fever (83–98%), cough (76%–82%), and myalgia or fatigue (11–44%) at illness onset. Sore throat has also been reported in some patients early in the clinical course. Less commonly reported symptoms include sputum production, headache, hemoptysis, and diarrhea. The fever course among patients with 2019-nCoV infection is not fully understood; it may be prolonged and intermittent. Asymptomatic infection has been described in one child with confirmed 2019-nCoV infection and chest computed tomography (CT) abnormalities.
Risk factors for severe illness are not yet clear, although older patients and those with chronic medical conditions may be at higher risk for severe illness. Nearly all reported cases have occurred in adults (median age 59 years). In one study of 425 patients with pneumonia and confirmed 2019-nCoV infection, 57% were male. Approximately one-third to one-half of reported patients had underlying medical comorbidities, including diabetes, hypertension, and cardiovascular disease.
Clinical Course
Clinical presentation among reported cases of 2019-nCoV infection varies in severity from asymptomatic infection or mild illness to severe or fatal illness. Some reports suggest the potential for clinical deterioration during the second week of illness. In one report, among patients with confirmed 2019-nCoV infection and pneumonia, just over half of patients developed dyspnea a median of 8 days after illness onset (range: 5–13 days).
Acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) developed in 17–29% of hospitalized patients, and secondary infection developed in 10%. Between 23–32% of hospitalized patients with 2019-nCoV infection required intensive care for respiratory support. Some hospitalized patients have required advanced organ support with invasive mechanical ventilation (4–10%), and a small proportion have also required extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO, 3–5%). Other reported complications include acute cardiac injury (12%) and acute kidney injury (4–7%). Among hospitalized patients with pneumonia, the case fatality proportion has been reported as high as 11–15%. However, as this estimate includes only-hospitalized patients, and therefore is biased upward.
Diagnostic Testing
Currently, confirmation of 2019-nCoV infection is performed at CDC using the CDC real-time RT-PCR assay for 2019-nCoV on respiratory specimens (which can include nasopharyngeal or oropharyngeal aspirates or washes, nasopharyngeal or oropharyngeal swabs, broncheoalveolar lavage, tracheal aspirates, or sputum) and serum. Information on specimen collection, handling, and storage is available at: Real-Time RT-PCR Panel for Detection 2019-Novel Coronavirus. After initial confirmation of 2019-nCoV infection, additional testing of clinical specimens can help inform clinical management, including discharge planning.
Laboratory and Radiographic Findings
The most common laboratory abnormalities reported among hospitalized patients with pneumonia on admission included leukopenia (9–25%), leukocytosis (24–30%), lymphopenia (63%), and elevated alanine aminotransferase and aspartate aminotransferase levels (37%). Most patients had normal serum levels of procalcitonin on admission. Chest CT images have shown bilateral involvement in most patients. Multiple areas of consolidation and ground glass opacities are typical findings reported to date.
2019-nCoV RNA has been detected from upper and lower respiratory tract specimens, and the virus has been isolated from bronchoalveolar lavage fluid. The duration of shedding of 2019-nCoV RNA in the upper and lower respiratory tracts is not yet known but may be several weeks or longer, which has been observed in cases of MERS-CoV or SARS-CoV infection.
Clinical Management and Treatment
No specific treatment for 2019-nCoV infection is currently available. Clinical management includes prompt implementation of recommended infection prevention and control measures and supportive management of complications, including advanced organ support if indicated. Corticosteroids should be avoided unless indicated for other reasons (for example, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease exacerbation or septic shock per Surviving Sepsis guidelinesexternal icon), because of the potential for prolonging viral replication as observed in MERS-CoV patients. For more information, see: WHO interim guidance on clinical management of severe acute respiratory infection when novel coronavirus (nCoV) infection is suspectedpdf iconexternal icon and Diagnosis and Treatment of Adults with Community-acquired Pneumonia. An Official Clinical Practice Guideline of the American Thoracic Society and Infectious Diseases Society of Americaexternal icon.
Healthcare personnel should care for patients in an Airborne Infection Isolation Room (AIIR). Standard Precautions, Contact Precautions, and Airborne Precautions and eye protection should be used when caring for the patient. See Interim Health Care Infection Prevention and Control Recommendations for Persons Under Investigation for 2019 Novel Coronavirus.
Patients with a mild clinical presentation may not initially require hospitalization. However, clinical signs and symptoms may worsen with progression to lower respiratory tract disease in the second week of illness; all patients should be monitored closely. Possible risk factors for progressing to severe illness may include, but are not limited to, older age, and underlying chronic medical conditions such as lung disease, cancer, heart failure, cerebrovascular disease, renal disease, liver disease, diabetes, immunocompromising conditions, and pregnancy.
The decision to monitor a patient in the inpatient or outpatient setting should be made on a case-by-case basis. This decision will depend not only on the clinical presentation, but also on the patient’s ability to engage in monitoring and the risk of transmission in the patient’s home environment. For more information, see Criteria to Guide Evaluation of Persons Under Investigation (PUI) for 2019-nCoV.
Additional resources:
Interim Guidance for Healthcare Professionals.
Resources for Hospitals and Healthcare Professionals Preparing for Patients with Suspected or Confirmed 2019-nCoV
Interim Health Care Infection Prevention and Control Recommendations for Persons Under Investigation for 2019 Novel Coronavirus
World Health Organization. Interim Guidance on Clinical management of severe acute respiratory infection when novel coronavirus (nCoV) infection is suspectedpdf iconexternal icon
American Thoracic Society and Infectious Diseases Society of America Clinical Practice Guidelines. Diagnosis and treatment of adults with community-acquired pneumoniaexternal icon
Surviving Sepsis Campaign: International Guidelines for Management of Sepsis and Septic Shock: 2016external icon
Clinical Practice Guidelines by the Infectious Diseases Society of America: 2018 Update on Diagnosis, Treatment, Chemoprophylaxis, and Institutional Outbreak Management of Seasonal Influenzaexternal icon
References
Al-Abdely HM, Midgley CM, Alkhamis AM, Abedi GR, Lu X, et al. Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus infection dynamics and antibody responses among clinically diverse patients, Saudi Arabia. Emerg Infect Dis. 2019 Apr;25(4):753-766.
Arabi YM, Mandourah Y, Al-Hameed F, Sindi AA, Almekhlafi GA, et al; Saudi Critical Care Trial Group. Corticosteroid Therapy for Critically Ill Patients with Middle East Respiratory Syndrome. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2018 Mar 15;197(6):757-767.
Chan JF, Yuan S, Kok K, To KK, Chu H, et al. A familial cluster of pneumonia associated with the 2019 novel coronavirus indicating person-to-person transmission: a study of a family cluster. Lancet. 2020 Jan 24. [Epub ahead of print]
Chen N, Zhou M, Dong X, Qu J, Gong F. Epidemiological and clinical characteristics of 99 cases of 2019 novel coronavirus pneumonia in Wuhan, China: a descriptive study. Lancet. 2020 Jan 30. [Epub ahead of print]
Corman VM, Albarrak AM, Omrani AS, Albarrak MM, Farah ME, et al. Viral Shedding and Antibody Response in 37 Patients With Middle East Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus Infection. Clin Infect Dis. 2016 Feb 15;62(4):477-483.
Huang C, Wang Y, Li X, Ren L, Zhao J, et al. Clinical features of patients infected with 2019 novel coronavirus in Wuhan, China. Lancet. 2020 Jan 24. [Epub ahead of print]
Li Q, Guan X, Wu P, Wang X, Zhou L, et al. Early Transmission Dynamics in Wuhan, China, of Novel Coronavirus-Infected Pneumonia. N Engl J Med. 2020 Jan 29.
Metlay JP, Waterer GW, Long AC, Anzueto A, Brozek J, et al. Diagnosis and treatment of adults with community-acquired pneumonia. An Official Clinical Practice Guideline of the American Thoracic Society and Infectious Diseases Society of America. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2019 Oct 1;200(7):e45-e67.
Peiris JS, Chu CM, Cheng VC, Chan KS, Hung IF, et al; HKU/UCH SARS Study Group. Clinical progression and viral load in a community outbreak of coronavirus-associated SARS pneumonia: a prospective study. Lancet. 2003 May 24;361(9371):1767-72.
Zhu N, Zhang D, Wang W, Li X, Yang B, et al; China Novel Coronavirus Investigating and Research Team. A Novel Coronavirus from Patients with Pneumonia in China, 2019. N Engl J Med. 2020 Jan 24. [Epub ahead of print]
Zumla A, Hui DS, Perlman S. Middle East respiratory syndrome. Lancet. 2015 Sep 5;386(9997):995-1007. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(15)60454-8. Epub 2015 Jun 3. Review.